---
layout: post
title: "The Most Expensive Hobby Is Overconfidence"
date: 2026-02-18
---

# The Most Expensive Hobby Is Overconfidence

Don’t fantasize about making money in fields you don’t truly understand.  
And don’t assume that just because you’re very good in one area, you’re a genius who can succeed at everything.

I recently watched a YouTube video by a jade merchant. He shares professional knowledge about jade rough — those uncut stones that may or may not contain something valuable inside. He explains how to read the surface, how to estimate what might be hidden beneath, and how experienced traders assess risk.

Over time, viewers started bringing him their own stones for evaluation.

Then one day, a couple showed up at his office.

The husband had become obsessed with “stone gambling” — buying uncut jade rough online, hoping to hit the jackpot. At first, maybe it felt exciting. Maybe he even won a little. But eventually, he lost a lot. In the end, they brought their entire remaining inventory to the YouTuber for appraisal.

The final appraisal wasn’t the most important part of the video.

What stayed with me were the words the jade merchant said afterward.

> No one would sell you a winning lottery ticket at a discount.

That line alone is worth pausing for.

If someone already knows something is valuable, why would they let you buy it cheaply? If it looks too good, it’s usually because you don’t see what they see.

He also said something else that hit even harder.

People can, and should, have hobbies. But if you want to get better at any hobby, you have to pay tuition.

Fishing. Tennis. Photography. Collecting. Investing.  
Every skill costs money, time, and mistakes.

You pay in equipment.  
You pay in lessons.  
You pay in failures.

That’s normal.

What’s dangerous is confusing “tuition” with “investment genius.”

The fan in the video had made some money in the stock market. That success gave him confidence. Maybe too much. He started believing he had the instinct. The touch. The eye.

But expertise doesn’t automatically transfer.

Being good at one game doesn’t make you good at every game.

That’s where overconfidence becomes the most expensive hobby of all.

There’s nothing wrong with curiosity. Nothing wrong with trying something new. But entering a field without understanding it — and expecting to make easy money — is like assuming every unopened stone hides treasure.

Most don’t.

The lesson isn’t “don’t try.”  
The lesson is: respect what you don’t know.

Because the market doesn’t reward blind confidence.  
It charges tuition.

And sometimes, it charges everything.
